The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dairy Disagreeables Busy the
Bacteriologists, by F. H. Hall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Dairy Disagreeables Busy the Bacteriologists

Authors: F. H. Hall
         H. A. Harding
         L. A. Rogers
         G. A. Smith

Release Date: January 9, 2022 [eBook #67134]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAIRY DISAGREEABLES BUSY THE
BACTERIOLOGISTS ***





  POPULAR EDITION.

  BULLETIN No. 183.        DECEMBER, 1900.

  New York Agricultural Experiment Station.

  GENEVA, N. Y.

  [Illustration]

  DAIRY DISAGREEABLES BUSY THE BACTERIOLOGISTS.

  F. H. HALL, H. A. HARDING, L. A. ROGERS AND G. A. SMITH.

  PUBLISHED BY THE STATION.




BOARD OF CONTROL.


     GOVERNOR THEODORE ROOSEVELT, Albany.
     STEPHEN H. HAMMOND, Geneva.
     AUSTIN C. CHASE, Syracuse.
     FRANK O. CHAMBERLAIN, Canandaigua.
     FREDERICK C. SCHRAUB, Lowville.
     NICHOLAS HALLOCK, Queens.
     LYMAN P. HAVILAND, Camden.
     EDGAR G. DUSENBURY, Portville.
     OSCAR H. HALE, North Stockholm.
     MARTIN L. ALLEN, Fayette.


OFFICERS OF THE BOARD.

     STEPHEN H. HAMMOND, _President_.
     WILLIAM O’HANLON, _Secretary and Treasurer_.


EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE.

     STEPHEN H. HAMMOND,
     MARTIN L. ALLEN,
     FRANK O. CHAMBERLAIN,
     FREDERICK C. SCHRAUB,
     LYMAN P. HAVILAND,
     NICHOLAS HALLOCK.


STATION STAFF.

     WHITMAN H. JORDAN, SC. D., _Director_.

     GEORGE W. CHURCHILL, _Agriculturist and Superintendent of Labor_.

     WILLIAM P. WHEELER, _First Assistant_ (_Animal Industry_).

     FRED C. STEWART, M.S., _Botanist_.

     LUCIUS L. VANSLYKE, PH.D., _Chemist_.

     CHRISTIAN G. JENTER, PH.C.,
  [A]WILLIAM H. ANDREWS, B.S.,
     J. ARTHUR LECLERC, B.S.,
  [B]AMASA D. COOK, PH.C.,
     FREDERICK D. FULLER, B.S.,
  [B]EDWIN B. HART, B.S.,
  [A]CHARLES W. MUDGE, B.S.,
  [A]ANDREW J. PATTEN, B.S., _Assistant Chemists_.

     HARRY A. HARDING, M.S., _Dairy Bacteriologist_.

     LORE A. ROGERS, B.S., _Assistant Bacteriologist_.

     GEORGE A. SMITH, _Dairy Expert_.

     FRANK H. HALL, B.S., _Editor and Librarian_.

     VICTOR H. LOWE, M.S.,
  [C]F. ATWOOD SIRRINE, M.S., _Entomologists_.

     PERCIVAL J. PARROTT, A.M., _Assistant Entomologist_.

     SPENCER A. BEACH, M.S., _Horticulturist_.

     HEINRICH HASSELBRING, B.S.A., _Assistant Horticulturist_.

     FRANK E. NEWTON,
     JENNIE TERWILLIGER, _Clerks and Stenographers_.

     ADIN H. HORTON, _Computer_.

Address all correspondence, not to individual members of the staff, but
to the NEW YORK AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION, GENEVA, N. Y.

The Bulletins published by the Station will be sent free to any farmer
applying for them.




POPULAR EDITION[D]

OF

BULLETIN NO. 183.

DAIRY DISAGREEABLES BUSY THE BACTERIOLOGISTS.

F. H. HALL.


FLAVOR IN MILK AND ITS PRODUCTS.

[Sidenote: =Flavor: How tested?=]

Good flavor sells milk, cream, butter and cheese; poor flavor condemns
them. Flavor is that indescribable something, which, in good dairy
products, appeals pleasantly to our senses, but often passes unnoticed
because so familiar; in poor products it is equally indescribable, but
more often characterized in vigorous language, when “frowzy” butter,
“garlicy” milk, “bitter” cream or “strong” cheese present their
offensive odors and tastes. The ordinary consumer calls flavor the
“taste” of the article which tickles his palate; but the expert knows
that the nerves of smell play the larger part, and he depends for his
judgment largely upon a trained nose. Hence we see the butter judge
or cheese scorer pass the trier beneath his nostrils with deep-drawn
breath and meditative study of the aroma which arises. Smells, however,
cannot be measured in degrees or separated into their elements by the
spectroscope; therefore we have to depend upon general terms, often
differing with the different experts, in our discussion of flavor; yet
we have some well-marked classes which serve as a basis for reference.

[Sidenote: =Faults of flavor classified.=]

We can separate the faulty flavors into classes by their origin. The
minute particles thrown off by dairy products, whose impact upon tongue
or nostrils give rise to taste or smell, may come (1) from compounds in
the food of the cow or developed in her body (2) from matters, other
than germs, taken up by the milk while it stands in poorly-ventilated
stables or rooms reeking with foul smells, or (3) from substances which
are the direct or indirect result of the activity of living organisms
in the milk.

Odors of the first class will be most noticeable while the milk is
warm from the cow and will not increase with time. They are really
far less common than dairymen generally believe and may be avoided
almost entirely by careful feeding. Garlic, turnips, cabbage and such
“fragrant” edibles will, of course, taint the milk if they are fed
within a few hours before milking; but when fed soon after the cows are
milked, the volatile oils to which these odors are due will generally
disappear from the animal’s system before the next morning or evening.

Too often odors of the second class are assigned to the first, and
the old cow takes the blame for man’s fault; as milk very readily and
quickly takes up smells and tastes from its surroundings. When the
owner delivers milk to the factory and is told that it “smells bad,” he
forgets that he or his men let it stand in the uncleaned stable to draw
in the “cowy” and worse odors, while the cows were being fed and some
other chores attended to; or that they poured it into pails that lacked
a little of perfect sweetness; and he immediately says; “I’ve got to
stop feeding silage.” “The cows ate some cabbage trimmings last night,”
or, “Someone forgot to close the rye-field gate.”

Odors of these two classes, due to volatile compounds in the milk, are
of most importance in the milk and cream trade, as the faults largely
disappear in making butter and cheese. Thorough æration is often
helpful in the removal of such flavors.

Odors of the third class, except in some very rare cases where the
udder itself is the seat of colonies of bacteria, are not observed in
freshly-drawn milk. The bacteria, molds and yeasts which cause them
must have a chance to develop and to set up chemical changes in the
milk; and this rarely occurs to any great extent within 12 hours from
the time the milk is drawn. A high temperature, however, is favorable
to growth of these low forms of plant life; so in warm weather milk
faults are common. In butter-making, and in cheese-making, also,
the heat often used to ripen the cream and the high temperature at
which the milk is held in “setting” and “cooking” the curd, furnish
conditions very favorable to the germs present and they develop with
great rapidity. In their growth part of the milk is used for food and
in its breaking down into simpler compounds the aromatic substances
which make flavor, good or bad, are formed.

The flavor of good milk and cream, then, is an inherent quality due
to the normal constituents of the milk; the flavors of butter, both
good and bad, except that due to the fat and to odors absorbed by the
milk, are held to be the result of bacterial action; the fundamental
flavors of cheese are probably due to chemical decomposition, started
by unorganized ferments known as enzyms; joined with which are other
flavors marking the individual cheeses, which are probably due to
bacteria; and it has recently been found that in some cases yeasts have
been the cause of bad flavor.


FISHY FLAVOR IN MILK.

[Sidenote: =Ready Relief.=]

This peculiar smell, as though the milk had set in a close room with
a barrel of not-too-fresh fish, was brought to the attention of the
Bacteriologist by a dealer who had already located it as coming from
the milk of a certain dairy. The dairyman is a more than ordinarily
careful milk-handler, who gladly coöperated with the Station in efforts
to locate the trouble in his herd. Bottles were supplied by the
Bacteriologist, which had been steamed to insure the death of all germ
life and then sealed. These sealed bottles were taken by the dairyman
to his farm; at milking time each was opened long enough to receive a
little milk from each quarter of the udder of a single cow; and then
re-sealed. All were brought to the Station; and, upon examination, the
odor was found only in the milk of one cow. The owner rejected her milk
and heard no further complaint, from the dealer, of bad smells. This
was the practical point; and it was thus easily and simply gained.

[Sidenote: =Cause not found.=]

From the scientist’s standpoint, though, only a beginning had been
made; the real cause of the trouble was as yet unknown; nor was any
satisfactory solution reached even after a long investigation. The
flavor could hardly come from the food, for all the cows were fed alike
and no objectionable weeds were found in their pasture. The cow seemed
perfectly healthy and no evidence of inflammation or disease could be
found on the udder or in the milk. Neither could any form of bacteria
be found in the milk, which, in cultures or introduced into the udder
of a healthy cow, would reproduce the fishy smell.

[Sidenote: =Rare fault.=]

At least two other cases of similar flavor have been known; but no
cause was evident in either case. The trouble is very infrequent, at
worst, and is here discussed mainly to show how easily a trouble due to
one cow can be located by taking individual samples of the milk; and
how cheaply gotten rid of by leaving out the objectionable product.


BITTER FLAVOR IN NEUFCHATEL CHEESE.

[Sidenote: =An uncompleted study.=]

A little better result than that in the study of fishy flavor was
reached in the investigation of a bitter flavor in Neufchatel cheese;
but this study also had to be left incomplete. The trouble in the
factory was easily remedied; and the germ responsible for the outbreak
was obtained in pure culture; but full study of the fault in all its
bearings was hindered by the refusal of the herd owner to admit that
the trouble was due to his milk. The investigation had to stop with the
guilty herd; it did not locate the original source of infection.

[Sidenote: =Method of detection.=]

This bitter flavor is not the same as the bitterness quite common in
milk and cream at certain seasons of the year; as the milk itself
tasted and smelled all right until well along in the process of
cheese-making when the curd was being ærated and drained. The flavor
was noticed in the factory in October and could not be checked, though
the maker took great pains to wash and scald all his utensils and
everything which touched the milk after it came from the farm. To
locate the trouble, samples were taken of the milk of each patron
and the cheese-making process started with each sample. In 18 hours
all the samples of curd appeared normal but two, which were gassy
and bad-smelling; and one of these, when drained and exposed to the
air, showed a pronounced bitter flavor. This sample proved to be from
the dairy which had furnished the milk for making the Neufchatel,
a milk specially selected because of its high fat-content. This
furnished direct proof that the fault lay in the milk, not in its
factory handling; and rejection of this milk ended the trouble in the
Neufchatel. As already stated, the study could not be carried into the
herd to see whether one cow, wrong stable surroundings, a stagnant pool
of water or contaminated dairy utensils were to blame for the trouble
in the factory.

[Sidenote: =Bacteria blamable.=]

Samples of this faulty milk were taken for laboratory study and various
bacteria and molds were separated. This was done by diluting the milk
with a sterilized fluid so that the germs were quite widely separated
when the milk was poured out in flat glass dishes. Each kind of germ
is marked by some peculiarity of growth which makes it possible to
distinguish between them; and pure cultures can be made by transferring
a little of the growing colony to a new dish of sterilized agar,
gelatin or other material suited to germ life. From these pure cultures
fresh milk from the Station herd was inoculated and small Neufchatel
cheeses made. No bitter flavor was noticed in similar check cheeses;
and the milk containing only one of the forms of germ life found
produced bitter cheese. The bitterness, as in the factory, was noticed
only after the curd was drained and ærated. Soft, poorly-drained curd
was free from the flavor though well inoculated with the short bacillus
which produced the bad flavor in well-dried curd. This shows that the
germ is one which requires exposure to the air to develop the bitter
compound in the cheese. Unfortunately this germ, when cultivated in
milk for some time lost the power of producing bitter cheese, so the
investigation came to an end.


SWEET FLAVOR IN CHEDDAR CHEESE.

[Sidenote: =A new cause of cheese faults.=]

By methods similar to those just given the cause of the common and
costly cheese fault known as “sweet flavor” has probably been found.
This investigation was demanded by the occurrence in some of the
best-conducted factories of outbreaks of the trouble which most
thorough cleansing and scalding fail to overcome. It is believed that
these attacks result in annual loss to the State of at least $10,000.
The trouble is of obscure origin and is peculiar in its development,
manifesting itself in flavors of varying intensity and character, from
a faint sweetness to a well-marked fruity smell and taste, and seeming
to appear and disappear without rule or method. This made study more
difficult than in the case of well-defined troubles; but its manner of
development in the cheese indicated some living germ as the cause; so
the attempt at solution of the problem was made from that standpoint.

By cultural methods, study was made of the flora of good and poor
cheeses; that is, the various forms of plant life existing in these
cheeses were separated from each other and their forms, actions and
effects noted. These forms of life were mostly bacteria and yeasts;
and, contrary to the usual rule, it was the latter which finally seemed
to demand attention.

Yeasts are plants a little higher in the scale of life than bacteria,
a little larger but still microscopic, and differing from bacteria in
their mode of reproduction, which is by budding of a new cell from
an old one rather than by division of an old cell into two new ones
of equal size. Their most characteristic action is the formation of
alcohol and carbon dioxide; which makes them indispensable in brewing
and bread making.

In good cheeses almost no yeasts were found, but in the sweet-flavored
cheeses sometimes half of the germs present were yeasts; and they were
always found where the sweet flavor was noticed. Yeasts have not been
recognized, hitherto, as a cause for such cheese faults; but their
presence in such numbers cast strong suspicion upon them; which actual
work proved to be well founded, for pronounced cases of sweet flavor
developed in cheeses made from pure milk inoculated with the yeasts;
and the vat in which the cheese was made became contaminated so that,
without further intentional inoculation, sweet-flavored cheese was
produced where none had been known before. As yeasts have hitherto
played minor parts in dairy investigations, no classification of those
found has yet been made, nor has the exact flavor due to each one been
determined. Further study is being given to the subject.


RUSTY SPOT IN CHEDDAR CHEESE.

[Sidenote: =Not a flavor.=]

Rusty spot is not a flavor trouble, as spotted cheeses of this kind
may be all right in taste and smell. The spots, however, are offensive
to the eye and render the cheese salable only at a reduction in price,
if at all. From the Station investigations, continued for nearly two
years, along much the same lines as the flavor studies but with a
little more definite guide in color than in taste and smell, some
direct knowledge has been gained, though not as definite as could be
desired along preventive and remedial lines.

[Sidenote: =Cause and conditions.=]

The rusty spots are colonies of minute plants, bacteria, growing on
the walls of the air spaces within the cheese. The trouble usually
appears in May, often does little harm during the middle of the summer
and generally disappears in October. In cheese made with a high acid
content the moisture content of the air spaces within the cheese is
low, and without abundance of moisture the germs make little growth;
hence the spots are too small to be noticed. The marked influence, on
the germs of rusty spot, of this slight variation in the character
of the cheese probably accounts for the unexpected appearance and
disappearance of the spots from cheeses of an occasional day’s make in
infected factories.

[Sidenote: =Cure.=]

Where the spots are not too large or too plentiful, giving the cheese a
good high color covers up the rustiness so that it is not noticeable.
To get entirely rid of the trouble has bothered some of the best
cheese-makers, aided by good advisers; but plenty of hot water followed
by a liberal use of live steam on vats, cans and working utensils
should give good results.




FOOTNOTES:


[A] Connected with Fertilizer Control.

[B] At Second Judicial Department Branch Station, Jamaica, N. Y.

[C] Absent on leave.

[D] This is a brief review of Bulletin No. 183 of this Station entitled
Notes on Some Dairy Troubles, by H. A. Harding, L. A. Rogers and G.
A. Smith. Anyone specially interested in the detailed account of the
investigations will be furnished, on application, with a copy of the
complete bulletin. The names of those who so request will be placed
on the Station mailing list to receive future bulletins, popular or
complete as desired. Bulletins are issued at irregular intervals as
investigations are completed, not monthly.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

Emboldened text is surrounded by equals signs: =bold=.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAIRY DISAGREEABLES BUSY THE
BACTERIOLOGISTS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
